Principles of Information Security

 

 
  
  

Sixth Edition

5

.PRIN(IPL[SOF

. INFORMATION SECURITY

Chapter1

K Introduction to

i Information
[ st

Security

Learning Objectives

 

» Upon completion of this material, you should be

able to:

— Define information security

— Recount the history of computer security and explain
how it evolved into information security

— Define key terms and critical concepts of information
security

— Explain the role of security in the systems
development life cycle

— Describe the information security roles of
professionals within an organization

 

Introduction

 

“Enterprise information security is a critical business
capability that needs to be aligned with corporate
expectations and culture that provides the
leadership and insight to identify risks and
implement effective controls.”—Martin Fisher, IT
Security Manager, North side Hospital, Atlanta,
Georgia

Security professionals must review the origins of
this field to understand its impact on our
understanding of information security today

 

The History of Information Security

 

+ Computer security began immediately after the first
mainframes were developed
— Groups developing code-breaking computations
during World War Il created the first modern
computers.
— Multiple levels of security were implemented.
» Physical controls limiting access to sensitive military
locations to authorized personnel
» Rudimentary in defending against physical theft,
espionage, and sabotage

 

Table 1-1 Key Dates in Information
Security (1 of 2)

1968 Maurice Wilkes discusses password security in Time - Sharing Computer
Systems.

1970 Willis H. Ware author the report Security Controls for Computer Systems:
Report of Defense Science Board Task Force on Computer Security—RAND
R.609 which was not declassified until 1979. | became known as the seminal
work identifying the need for computer Security.

1973 Schell, Downey, and Popek examine the need for additional security in
military systems in Preliminary Notes on the Design of Secure Military
Computer Systems.

1975 The Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) examines DES
(Digital Encryption Standard) In the Federal Register.

1978 Bisbey and Hollingsworth publish their study “Protection Analysis: Final
Report,” which discussed the Protection Analysis project created by ARPA to
better understand the vulnerabilities of operating system security and
examine the possibility of automated vulnerability detection techniques in
existing system software.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 1-1 Key Dates in Information
Security (2 of 2)

LIV T

Dennis Ritchie publishes “On the Security of UNIX™ and “Protection of Data File Contents,”
which discussed secure user IDs, secure group IDs, and the problems inherent in the
systems.

 

 

1982 The US. Department of Defense Computer Security Evaluation Center publishes the first
version of the Trusted Computer Security (TCSEC) documents, which came to be known as
the Rainbow Series.

 

1982 Grampp and Morris write “The UNIX System: UNIX Operating System Security.” In this
report the authors examined four “important handles to computer security™: physical control
of primes and computer facilities, management commitment to security objectives, education
of employees, and administrative procedures aimed at increased security.

 

premise was: “No technique can be secure against wiretapping or is equivalent on the
computer. Therefore no technique can be secure against the system administrator or other
privileged users... the naive user have no chance.”

 

1992 Researchers for the Internet Engineering Task force, working at the Naval Research
Laboratory, develop the Simple Internet Protocol Plus (SIPP) Security protocols, creating
what is now known as IPSEC security.

 

 

‘ 1984 Reeds and Weinberger publish “File Security and the UNIX System Crypt Command.” Their

 

 

Figure 1-1 The Enigma (1 of 2)

 

Figure 1-1 The Enigma (2 of 2)

 

« Earlier versions of the German code machine Enigma were
first broken by the Poles in the 1930s. The British and
Americans managed to break later, more complex versions
during World War Il. The increasingly complex versions of
the Enigma, especially the submarine or Unterseeboot
version of the Enigma, caused considerable anguish to Allied
forces before finally being cracked. The information gained
from decrypted transmissions was used to anticipate the
actions of German armed forces. 'Some ask why, if we were
reading the Enigma, we did not win the war earlier. One
might ask, instead, when, if ever, we would have won the
war if we hadn't read it'

 

The 1960s

 

« Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) began
to examine the feasibility of redundant networked
communications.

+ Larry Roberts developed the ARPANET from its
inception.

 

Figure 1-2 Development of the ARPANET

ARPANET Program Plan
June 3, 1968

In ARPA, the Program Plan is

the master document describing sttt pesey TR Mo
a major program. This plan,
which T wrote in 1968, had the
following concepts:

Progrom P e
b

rsomce mmanmg courims srTeves

1. Objectives - Develap Networklng and
Revource Sharing

2 Techmical Newd - Linking Computers

 

6 Plan- Devebop INI"s and start 1269
2% Cont- 34 M for 6871

 

 

The 1970s and 80s (1 of 2)

 

« ARPANET grew in popularity, as did its potential for
misuse.

* Fundamental problems with ARPANET security
were identified.

— No safety procedures for dial-up connections to
ARPANET

— Nonexistent user identification and authorization to
system

 

The 1970s and 80s (2 of 2)

 

+ Information security began with RAND Report R-
609 (paper that started the study of computer
security and identified the role of management and
policy issues in it).

» The scope of computer security grew from physical
security to include:

— Securing the data
— Limiting random and unauthorized access to data

— Involving personnel from multiple levels of the
organization in information security

 

Figure 1-4 lllustration of computer network
vulnerabilities from RAND Report R-609

Computer Network Vulnerabilities

 

HiF

 

MULTICS (1 of 2)

 

 Early focus of computer security research centered
on a system called Multiplexed Information and
Computing Service (MULTICS).

« First operating system was created with security
integrated into core functions.

» Mainframe, time-sharing operating system was
developed in the mid-1960s by General Electric
(GE), Bell Labs, and Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT).

 

MULTICS (2 of 2)

 

« Several MULTICS key players created UNIX.
— Primary purpose of UNIX was text processing.

+ Late 1970s: The microprocessor expanded
computing capabilities and security threats.

 

The 1990s

 

Networks of computers became more common, as
did the need to connect them to each other.
Internet became the first global network of
networks.

Initially, network connections were based on de
facto standards.

In early Internet deployments, security was treated
as a low priority.

In 1993, DEFCON conference was established for
those interested in information security.

 

2000 to Present

 

The Internet brings millions of unsecured computer
networks into continuous communication with each
other.

The ability to secure a computer’s data was
influenced by the security of every computer to
which it is connected.

Growing threat of cyber attacks has increased the
awareness of need for improved security.

— Nation-states engaging in information warfare

 

 

What Is Security? (1 of 2)

“A state of being secure and free from danger or
harm; the actions taken to make someone or
something secure.”

A successful organization should have multiple
layers of security in place to protect:

— Operations

— Physical infrastructure

— People

— Functions

— Communications

— Information

 

What Is Security? (2 of 2)

 

of inforn

    

.
3MS anc
formation

.

.

 

  

acteristics of infor

      

R [ anned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for u
) 7.}
LTSI

permitted in a license distributed with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website
for classroom use

 

Figure 1-5 Components of information
security (1 of 2)

    

R

- Computer Securif
© Cengage Leaming 2015

 

Figure 1-5 The C.1.A. triad (2 of 2)

 

© Cengage Leaming 2015

 

Key Information Security Concepts (1 of 3)

 

safeguard, or countermeasure

 

 

Key Information Security Concepts (2 of 3)

 

\reat source

 

Wy

linerability

 

Key Information Security Concepts (3 of 3)

 

« A computer can be the subject of an attack and/or
the object of an attack.

— When it is the subject of an attack, the computer is
used as an active tool to conduct attack.

— When it is the object of an attack, the computer is the
entity being attacked.

 

Figure 1-7 Key concepts in information
security

 

Source. (top left to bottom right): © iStockphoto/tadija, Internet Explorer, ©
iStockphoto/darrenwise , Internet Explorer, Microsoft Excel.

 

Critical Characteristics of Information

 

+ The value of information comes from the
characteristics it possesses:
— Availability
— Accuracy
— Authenticity
— Confidentiality
— Integrity
— Utility
— Possession

%, CENGAGE _ Copyriaht © 2018 Cengage. May not be copied, scanned, m‘au'vhcamd in whole or in part, except for m;sr

 

TRy istril
Learning LR L SR

Figure 1-9 The McCumber Cube

 

© Congage Leaming 2015

 

Balancing Information Security and Access

 

» Impossible to obtain perfect information security—it
is a process, not a goal.

« Security should be considered a balance between
protection and availability.

+ To achieve balance, the level of security must allow
reasonable access, yet protect against threats.

 

Approaches to Information Security
Implementation: Bottom-Up Approach

 

Grassroots effort: Systems administrators attempt to
improve security of their systems.

Key advantage: technical expertise of individual
administrators

Seldom works, as it lacks a number of critical features:
— Participant support
— Organizational staying power

 

d in a license

Approaches to Information Security
Implementation: Top-Down Approach

« |nitiated by upper management
— Issue policy, procedures, and processes
— Dictate goals and expected outcomes of project
— Determine accountability for each required action
» The most successful type of top-down approach
also involves a formal development strategy
referred to as systems development life cycle.

 

 

Figure 1-12 Approaches to information
security implementation

Top-down approach Bottom-up approach

 

 

 

 

© Congage Luaming 1015

 

Security in the Systems Development Life
Cycle

 

« Systems development life cycle (SDLC): a
methodology for the design and implementation of
an information system

* Methodology: a formal approach to solving a
problem based on a structured sequence of
procedures

» Using a methodology:

— Ensures a rigorous process with a clearly defined
goal

— Increases probability of success

 

Figure 1-13 SDLC waterfall methodology

   

Repeat when system no longer viable

© Congage Learming 201

 

Investigation

 

« What problem is the system being developed to
solve?

« Objectives, constraints, and scope of project are
specified.

« Preliminary cost-benefit analysis is developed.

+ At the end of all phases, a process is undertaken to
assess economic, technical, and behavioral
feasibilities and ensure implementation is worth the
time and effort.

 

Analysis

 

Consists of assessments of:

— The organization

— Current systems

— Capability to support proposed systems
Analysts determine what the new system is

expected to do and how it will interact with existing
systems.

Analysis ends with documentation of findings and
an update of feasibility.

 

Logical Design

 

The first and driving factor is the business need.
— Applications are selected to provide needed services.

Data support and structures capable of providing
the needed inputs are identified.

Specific technologies are delineated to implement
the physical solution.

Analysts generate estimates of costs and benefits to
allow comparison of available options.

Feasibility analysis is performed at the end.

 

Physical Design

 

« Specific technologies are selected to support the
alternatives identified and evaluated in the logical
design.

« Selected components are evaluated on make-or-
buy decision.

 Feasibility analysis is performed.

+ Entire solution is presented to organization’s
management for approval.

 

Implementation

 

* Needed software is created.
« Components are ordered, received, and tested.

» Users are trained and supporting documentation
created.

» Feasibility analysis is prepared.
— Sponsors are presented with the system for a
performance review and acceptance test.

 

Maintenance and Change

 

» Longest and most expensive phase

« Consists of the tasks necessary to support and
modify the system for the remainder of its useful life

« Life cycle continues until the team determines the
process should begin again from the investigation
phase

* When current system can no longer support the
organization’s mission, a new project is
implemented

 

Software Assurance (1 of 3)

 

+ Many organizations recognize the need to include
planning for security objectives in the SDLC used to
create systems.

— Established procedures to create software that is more
capable of being deployed in a secure fashion

« This approach is known as software assurance (SA).

+ A national effort is under way to create a common body
of knowledge focused on secure software development.

 

Software Assurance (2 of 3)

 

+ U.S. Department of Defense and Department of
Homeland Security supported the Software Assurance
Initiative, which resulted in the publication of Secure
Software Assurance (SwA) Common Body of
Knowledge (CBK).

+ SwA CBK serves as a strongly recommended guide to
developing more secure applications.

+ SwA CBK, which is a work in progress, contains the
following sections:

— Nature of Dangers
— Fundamental Concepts and Principles
— Ethics, Law, and Governance

 

Software Assurance (3 of 3)

 

— Secure Software Requirements
— Secure Software Design
— Secure Software Construction

— Secure Software Verification, Validation, and
Evaluation

— Secure Software Tools and Methods
— Secure Software Processes

— Secure Software Project Management
— Acquisition of Secure Software

— Secure Software Sustainment

 

Software Design Principles (1 of 2)

 

Good software development results in secure
products that meet all design specifications.
+ Some commonplace security principles
— Keep design simple and small
— Access decisions by permission not exclusion
— Every access to every object checked for authority
— Design depends on possession of keys/passwords
— Protection mechanisms require two keys to unlock
— Programs/users utilize only necessary privileges

 

Software Design Principles (2 of 2)

 

« Some commonplace security principles
— Minimize mechanisms common to multiple users

— Human interface must be easy to use so users
routinely/automatically use protection mechanisms.

 

The NIST Approach to Securing the SDLC

 

« NIST Special Publication 800-64, rev. 2, maintains
that early integration of security in the SDLC
enables agencies to maximize return on investment
through:

— Early identification and mitigation of security
vulnerabilities and misconfigurations

— Awareness of potential engineering challenges

— |dentification of shared security services and reuse of
security strategies and tools

— Facilitation of informed executive decision making

 

The NIST Approach: Initiation

 

« Security at this point is looked at in terms of
business risks, with information security office
providing input.

« Key security activities include:

— Delineation of business requirements in terms of
confidentiality, integrity, and availability

— Determination of information categorization and
identification of known special handling requirements
to transmit, store, or create information

— Determination of any privacy requirements

 

Figure 1-14 Relating security considerations
in the Initiation phase

 

Source: NIST SP 800-64 Rev. 2: Security Considerations in the
System Development Life Cycle.

 

The NIST Approach:

Development/Acquisition

 

« Key security activities include:

— Conducting risk assessment and using results to
supplement baseline security controls

— Analyzing security requirements
— Performing functional and security testing

— Preparing initial documents for system certification
and accreditation

— Designing security architecture

 

Figure 1-15 Relating security considerations
in the Development/Acquisition phase

 

Source: NIST SP 800-64 Rev. 2: Security Considerations in the System
Development Life Cycle.

 

RN S WA o] ol (o - el g K

 

Implementation/Assessment

« System is installed and evaluated in operational
environment.

« Key security activities include:
— Integrating information system into its environment

— Planning and conducting system certification
activities in synchronization with testing of security
controls

— Completing system accreditation activities

 

Figure 1-16 Relating security considerations
in the Implementation/Assessment phase

 

Source: NIST SP 800-64 Rev. 2: Security Considerations in the System
Development Life Cycle.

 

The NIST Approach: Operations and
Maintenance

 

« Systems are in place and operating, enhancements
and/or modifications to the system are developed
and tested, and hardware and/or software are
added or replaced.

Key security activities include:
— Conducting operational readiness review
— Managing configuration of system

— Instituting process and procedure for assured

operations and continuous monitoring of information
system'’s security controls

— Performing reauthorization as required

 

Figure 1-17 Relating security considerations
in the Operation/Maintenance phase

 

Source: NIST SP 800-64 Rev. 2: Security Considerations in the System
Development Life Cycle.

 

The NIST Approach: Disposal

 

» Provides for disposal of system and closeout of any
contracts in place

« Key security activities include:
— Building and executing disposal/transition plan
— Archival of critical information

— Sanitization of media
— Disposal of hardware and software

 

Figure 1-18 Relating security
considerations in the Disposal phase

 

Source: NIST SP 800-64 Rev. 2: Security Considerations in the System
Development Life Cycle.

 

Figure 1-19 Microsoft's SDL (1 of 3)

 

« Training:

— Core security training
* Requirements:

— Establish security requirements

— Create quality gates/bug bars

— Perform security and privacy risk assessments
« Design:

— Establish design requirements

— Perform attack surface analysts/ reduction

— Use threat modeling

 

Figure 1-19 Microsoft's SDL (2 of 3)

 

* Implementation:

— Use approved tools

— Deprecate unsafe functions

— Perform static analysis
 Veri cation:

— Perform dynamic analysis

— Perform fuzz testing

— Conduct attack surface review

 

Figure 1-19 Microsoft's SDL (3 of 3)

 

Release:

— Create an incident response plan
— Conduct nal security review

— Certify release and archive
Response:

— Execute incident response plan
Source © Microsoft Learning 2015

 

Security Professionals and the

 

Organization

« Wide range of professionals are required to support
a diverse information security program.

« Senior management is the key component.

« Additional administrative support and technical
expertise are required to implement details of the IS

program.

 

Senior Management

 

« Chief information officer (CIO)
— Senior technology officer
— Primarily responsible for advising the senior
executives on strategic planning
« Chief information security officer (CISO)

— Has primary responsibility for assessment,
management, and implementation of IS in the
organization

— Usually reports directly to the CIO

 

Information Security Project Team

 

« A small functional team of people who are
experienced in one or multiple facets of required
technical and nontechnical areas:

— Champion

— Team leader

— Security policy developers
— Risk assessment specialists
— Security professionals

— Systems administrators

— End users

 

Data Responsibilities

 

« Data owners: senior management responsible for
the security and use of a particular set of
information

+ Data custodians: responsible for the information
and systems that process, transmit, and store it

+ Data users: individuals with an information security
role

 

Communities of Interest

 

« Group of individuals united by similar
interests/values within an organization
— Information security management and professionals

— Information technology management and
professionals

— Organizational management and professionals

 

Information Security: Is It an Art or a

 

Science?

» Implementation of information security is often
described as a combination of art and science.

+ “Security artisan” idea: based on the way individuals
perceive system technologists and their abilities.

 

Security as Art

 

« No hard and fast rules nor many universally
accepted complete solutions

* No manual for implementing security through entire
system

 

Security as Science

 

« Dealing with technology designed for rigorous
performance levels.

+ Specific conditions cause virtually all actions in
computer systems.

« Almost every fault, security hole, and systems
malfunction is a result of interaction of specific
hardware and software.

« If developers had sufficient time, they could resolve
and eliminate faults.

 

Security as a Social Science

+ Social science examines the behavior of individuals
interacting with systems.

« Security begins and ends with the people that
interact with the system, intentionally or otherwise.

+ Security administrators can greatly reduce the
levels of risk caused by end users and create more
acceptable and supportable security profiles.

 

 

Summary (1 of 2)

 

« Computer security began immediately after the first
mainframes were developed.

= Successful organizations have multiple layers of
security in place: physical, personal, operations,
communications, network, and information.

« Security should be considered a balance between
protection and availability.

 

Summary (2 of 2)

 

« Information security must be managed similar to
any major system implemented in an organization
using a methodology like the SDLC.

+ Implementation of information security is often
described as a combination of art and science.

 

